feat(progress-bar): initial design guidance (#11)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1020-progress-bar-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-16
updated: 2024-10-22
---

# Progress Bar Component

> [Progress Bar](https://clarity.design/documentation/progress) is a linear indicator that shows the progress of an ongoing, user-initiated process. Progress bars are designed for use in the [main content area](https://clarity.design/documentation/app-layout), [header](https://clarity.design/documentation/header), [cards](https://clarity.design/documentation/card), and [modals](https://clarity.design/documentation/modal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [progress bar](https://clarity.design/documentation/progress) is a linear indicator that shows the progress of an ongoing, user-initiated process. Progress bars are designed for use in the [main content area](https://clarity.design/documentation/app-layout), [header](https://clarity.design/documentation/header), [cards](https://clarity.design/documentation/card), and [modals](https://clarity.design/documentation/modal).
```

> A [progress bar](https://clarity.design/documentation/progress) is a linear indicator that shows the progress of an ongoing, user-initiated process. Progress bars are designed for use in the [main content area](https://clarity.design/documentation/app-layout), [header](https://clarity.design/documentation/header), [cards](https://clarity.design/documentation/card), and [modals](https://clarity.design/documentation/modal).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [progress bar](https://clarity.design/documentation/progress) is a linear indicator that displays the progress of an ongoing, user-initiated process. Progress bars are designed for use in various areas, including the [main content area](https://clarity.design/documentation/app-layout), [header](https://clarity.design/documentation/header), [cards](https://clarity.design/documentation/card), and [modals](https://clarity.design/documentation/modal).
```

## Guidance

### Determinate Progress Bar

> - **Must** use "determinate progress bar" when the process has a known duration. Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a "determinate progress bar" when the process has a known duration. Examples:
```

> - **Must** use "Determinate progress bar" when the process has a known duration. Please see examples below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use "determinate progress bar" when the process has a known duration. Examples:
```

>     - file downloads or uploads

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - File downloads or uploads, this allows users to see how much of the action is complete and how much remains, providing visual feedback and helping them stay focused on their task.
```

>     - File downloads or uploads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - file downloads or uploads
```

>     - a series of configuration steps that happen during an initialization process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - A series of configuration steps that occur during an initialization process. This provides clarity on progress, guides users through anticipated actions, reduces frustration and errors, and visually reinforces that the initialization is actively in progress.
```

>     - A series of configuration steps that happen during an initialization process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - a series of configuration steps that happen during an initialization process
```

This isn't a complete sentence.

> - **Must** explain what the progress bar is showing and why it might take time. For example, if you're uploading a file, provide the file name and size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** explain what the progress bar is showing and why it might take time. For example, if uploading a file, include details such as the file name and size. This transparency helps users understand the ongoing process and sets appropriate expectations for completion time.
```

> - **Must** avoid changing styles of the progress bar for the purpose of state switch.  e.g. Green to indicate Success is not recommended. Sight impaired users may not read the additional meaning without additional information such as a text label or icon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** avoid changing the styles of the progress bar for state indications, such as using green to signify success. This practice can be misleading for users with sight impairments, as they may not perceive the color change without accompanying information, such as a text label or icon.
```

> - **Should** ensure that users can easily spot the progress bar, regardless of the device or interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** ensure that users can easily spot the progress bar, regardless of the device or interface. This enhances visibility and helps users track their progress effectively, improving overall usability.
```

> - **May** use an optional label on the right that shows percentage completion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **may** use an optional label on the right side of the progress bar to display percentage completion. This provides users with additional context about their progress and can enhance their understanding of how much of the task is finished.
```

### Indeterminate Progress Bar

> - **Must** use "Indeterminate progress bar" for a process that has no estimate of an end time. It indicates that work is occurring without indicating a scope for completion or implying an estimate for how long it will take.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use an "indeterminate progress bar" for processes that do not have an estimated end time. This type of progress bar indicates that work is ongoing without providing a scope for completion or implying how long the process will take.
```

> - **Should** consider availability of space while choosing Indeterminate progress bar. In many cases, [Clarity Spinner](https://clarity.design/documentation/spinner) component is best because they occupy less space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** consider the availability of space when choosing an indeterminate progress bar. In many cases, the [Clarity Spinner](https://clarity.design/documentation/spinner) component may be more appropriate, as it occupies less space while still indicating that work is ongoing.
```
